.TH NGINX-OPTIMIZER 1 "January 2025" "nginx-optimizer 0.9.0-beta" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
nginx-optimizer \- Comprehensive NGINX optimization tool for WordPress
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nginx-optimizer
[\fICOMMAND\fR]
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fISITE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nginx-optimizer
is a comprehensive tool for analyzing, optimizing, and managing NGINX configurations, with a focus on WordPress deployments. It supports HTTP/3, FastCGI caching, Redis, Brotli compression, security headers, and anti-bot honeypots. The tool handles system nginx, Docker containers, and wp-test environments.
.PP
All operations create automatic backups and can be previewed with \fB--dry-run\fR before applying changes. Configuration validation and testing are performed before reloading nginx.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B analyze \fR[\fISITE\fR]
Analyze nginx configuration and show missing optimizations. If a site is specified, only that site is analyzed; otherwise all detected nginx instances are analyzed.
.TP
.B optimize \fR[\fISITE\fR]
Apply optimizations to the specified site or all sites. Creates automatic backup before making changes. Use with \fB--feature\fR or \fB--exclude\fR to control which optimizations are applied.
.TP
.B compile
Compile nginx from source with Brotli support and HTTP/3 (QUIC) modules. Useful when package managers don't provide required modules.
.TP
.B rollback \fR[\fITIMESTAMP\fR]
Rollback to a previous configuration. If no timestamp is provided, displays available backups and prompts for selection. Timestamps are in YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS format.
.TP
.B test \fR[\fISITE\fR]
Test nginx configuration syntax without applying changes. Validates configuration files for errors.
.TP
.B status \fR[\fISITE\fR]
Show current optimization status for the specified site or all sites. Displays which features are enabled and which are missing.
.TP
.B list
List all detected nginx installations including system nginx, Docker containers, and wp-test instances.
.TP
.B benchmark \fR[\fISITE\fR]
Run performance benchmarks on the specified site. Requires a site parameter. Tests response times, throughput, and compression effectiveness.
.TP
.B honeypot \fI<SITE>\fR
Deploy honeypot tarpit for the specified site. Creates canary tokens and tarpit endpoints to trap bots and automated attackers. Requires site domain as parameter.
.TP
.B honeypot-logs \fR[\fIHOURS\fR]
Analyze honeypot logs for the specified time period. Default is 24 hours. Shows attacker IPs, user agents, and attack patterns.
.TP
.B honeypot-export
Export attacker IPs from honeypot logs for use in blocklists or firewall rules.
.TP
.B help
Display help message with usage information and examples.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --dry-run
Show what would be done without actually applying changes. Useful for previewing optimizations before committing to them.
.TP
.B --force
Skip confirmation prompts. Use with caution in production environments.
.TP
.BR -q ", " --quiet
Suppress informational output. Only errors and warnings are displayed. Useful for scripting and automation.
.TP
.B --feature \fINAME\fR
Apply only the specified feature. Can be used to enable a single optimization without affecting others. See \fBFEATURES\fR section for available feature names.
.TP
.B --exclude \fINAME\fR
Exclude the specified feature from optimization. All other features are applied normally. See \fBFEATURES\fR section for available feature names.
.TP
.B --backup-dir \fIPATH\fR
Use a custom directory for storing backups instead of the default ~/.nginx-optimizer/backups/.
.TP
.BR -v ", " --version
Display version information and exit.
.SH FEATURES
The following features can be enabled or excluded using \fB--feature\fR or \fB--exclude\fR:
.TP
.B http3
HTTP/3 (QUIC) protocol support for improved performance and reduced latency.
.TP
.B fastcgi-cache
Full-page FastCGI caching with WordPress-aware cache exclusions for dynamic content.
.TP
.B redis
Redis object caching integration for improved database query performance.
.TP
.B brotli
Brotli and Zopfli compression for reduced bandwidth usage and faster page loads.
.TP
.B security
Security headers (CSP, HSTS, X-Frame-Options) and rate limiting to protect against attacks.
.TP
.B wordpress
WordPress-specific exclusions for admin areas, login pages, and dynamic endpoints.
.TP
.B opcache
PHP OpCache optimization for improved PHP performance with 8.2/8.3 support.
.TP
.B honeypot
Bot tarpit with canary tokens to trap and identify automated attackers.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.nginx-optimizer/
Main data directory for nginx-optimizer. Contains all configuration, backups, and logs.
.TP
.I ~/.nginx-optimizer/backups/
Backup storage directory. Each backup is timestamped in YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS format.
.TP
.I ~/.nginx-optimizer/logs/
Log file directory. Each optimization run creates a timestamped log file.
.TP
.I ~/.nginx-optimizer/config.json
Configuration file for nginx-optimizer settings (reserved for future use).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success. Operation completed without errors.
.TP
.B 1
Error. Operation failed or invalid arguments provided. Check log files for details.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Analyze all nginx instances:
.B nginx-optimizer analyze
.TP
Analyze specific site:
.B nginx-optimizer analyze quiz-test.local
.TP
Preview optimizations without applying:
.B nginx-optimizer optimize --dry-run
.TP
Optimize specific site:
.B nginx-optimizer optimize quiz-test.local
.TP
Apply only HTTP/3 feature:
.B nginx-optimizer optimize --feature http3
.TP
Optimize all sites except Brotli:
.B nginx-optimizer optimize --exclude brotli
.TP
Run performance benchmark:
.B nginx-optimizer benchmark quiz-test.local
.TP
Restore previous backup:
.B nginx-optimizer rollback 20250124-143022
.TP
Check optimization status:
.B nginx-optimizer status
.TP
Deploy honeypot for site:
.B nginx-optimizer honeypot mysite.com
.TP
Analyze honeypot activity (last 24 hours):
.B nginx-optimizer honeypot-logs
.TP
Export attacker IPs for blocklist:
.B nginx-optimizer honeypot-export
.TP
Silent mode for scripting:
.B nginx-optimizer optimize --quiet --force
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B nginx-optimizer
supports multiple nginx deployment types:
.TP
\(bu System nginx (installed via package manager)
.TP
\(bu Docker containers (auto-detected)
.TP
\(bu wp-test environments (WordPress testing tool)
.PP
The tool requires the following commands to be available:
.BR rsync ", " curl ", " jq ", and " bash " >= 3.2"
.PP
Optional but recommended:
.BR nginx ", " docker ", " redis-cli
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nginx (8),
.BR nginx.conf (5),
.BR docker (1),
.BR redis-cli (1)
.PP
Online documentation:
.UR https://github.com/MarcinDudekDev/nginx-optimizer
.UE
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to:
.UR https://github.com/MarcinDudekDev/nginx-optimizer/issues
.UE
.PP
Include the following in bug reports:
.TP
\(bu nginx-optimizer version (\fBnginx-optimizer --version\fR)
.TP
\(bu Operating system and version
.TP
\(bu nginx version (\fBnginx -v\fR)
.TP
\(bu Relevant log files from ~/.nginx-optimizer/logs/
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Marcin Dudek.
.PP
Maintained by the nginx-optimizer project contributors.
